✅ Git / GitHub Interview Questions List for React Developer

================================================================

1.What is Git?

Git is a distributed version control system used to track changes in source code during software development.
It helps developers save project history, manage different versions, and work safely without losing previous code.
Git also makes team collaboration easier because multiple developers can work on the same project.
It is one of the most commonly used tools in software development.

2.What is GitHub?

GitHub is a cloud-based code hosting and collaboration platform built around Git.
It allows developers to store their Git repositories online, manage code versions, and work together with team members from anywhere.
Developers can push code, pull code, create branches, review changes, and share projects easily on GitHub.
It is one of the world’s largest software collaboration platforms used by more than 150 million developers.

3.What is the difference between Git and GitHub?

Git is a version control tool used locally on a developer’s computer to track code changes and manage project history.
GitHub is an online cloud platform used to store Git repositories remotely and collaborate with other developers.
Git works offline on the local machine, while GitHub works online for backup and teamwork.
In simple words, Git manages the code and GitHub hosts that managed code on the internet.

4.What is a Git Repository?

A Git Repository is a project folder that is managed and tracked by Git.
It stores all the project files along with complete version history, commits, branches, and code changes.
Git continuously monitors this repository and records every update made by the developer.
This helps in restoring old versions and managing teamwork easily.
So a Git Repository is the main storage unit of a Git project.

5.What is version control system?

A Version Control System is a software tool used to track and manage changes made in source code over time.
It stores different versions of the project so developers can see what was changed, when it was changed, and who changed it.
It also helps restore previous code if any mistake happens.
Version control is very useful in team collaboration and safe development.
Git is the most popular Version Control System.

6.Why do we use Git in projects?

We use Git in projects to track every code change and maintain the complete development history.
It helps developers save different versions of the project, so mistakes can be fixed by restoring older code.
Git also makes team collaboration easier because multiple developers can work on the same project safely.
Branching and merging features help manage new features without affecting the main code.
Therefore, Git is used for safe, organized, and collaborative development.

7.What is git init?

git init is a Git command used to initialize a normal project folder as a new Git repository.
When we run this command, Git starts tracking all changes inside that folder.
It also creates a hidden .git directory which stores commit history, branches, and Git configuration.
This is the first step to start using Git in any project.
So git init converts a simple folder into a Git-managed repository.

commond -: git init

8.What is git clone?

git clone is a Git command used to copy an existing remote repository from GitHub to the local computer.
It downloads all project files, commit history, branches, and Git configuration into a new local folder.
This command is commonly used when we want to work on an already created team project.
Instead of creating the project manually, we clone it directly.
So git clone creates a full local copy of a remote repository.

commond  -:git clone https://github.com/user/react-app.git

9.What is git status?

git status is a Git command used to check the current state of the working directory and staging area.
It shows which files are modified, which files are staged, and which files are still untracked by Git.
This command helps developers understand what changes are pending before committing.
It is one of the most frequently used Git commands during development.
So git status gives the present condition of the repository.

commond  -:git status

10.What is git add?

git add is a Git command used to move changed or new files from the working directory to the staging area.
Git does not directly commit every modified file, so we first select which files should be included in the next commit.
The git add command prepares those files for commit.
In simple words, it tells Git that these files are ready to be saved in version history.
So git add is the staging command in Git.

commond  -:git add .


11.What is staging area in Git?

The Staging Area is an intermediate place in Git where changed files are kept temporarily before making a commit.
After modifying files, we use git add to send them to the staging area.
Only the files present in the staging area will be included in the next commit.
This gives developers control over which changes should be saved in version history.
So staging area works like a waiting zone before commit.

command -:git add App.jsx

12.What is git commit?

git commit is a Git command used to permanently save the staged changes into Git version history.
After files are moved to the staging area, git commit creates a snapshot of those files.
This snapshot becomes a saved version of the project that can be revisited later.
Each commit is usually written with a meaningful message to describe the changes.
So git commit records a new version in the repository history.

COMMOND ;- git commit -m "added login page"

13.Why do we write commit messages?

We write commit messages to clearly describe what changes were saved in that particular commit.
Since a project contains many commits over time, commit messages help developers understand the purpose of each saved version.
They make it easier to track history, review updates, and identify mistakes later.
Meaningful commit messages are also very helpful in team collaboration.
So commit messages act like notes for every code snapshot.

14.What is git push?

git push is a Git command used to upload local committed changes from the computer to the remote GitHub repository.
After we save code locally using git commit, those changes still remain only on our machine.
git push sends that updated commit history to GitHub so it becomes available online.
This helps in backup, sharing code, and team collaboration.
So git push transfers local code to the remote repository.

git push origin main

15.What is git pull?

git pull is a Git command used to download the latest updated code from the remote GitHub repository to the local machine.
When other developers push new changes to GitHub, our local project does not get those changes automatically.
By using git pull, we fetch and merge the latest remote updates into our local repository.
This keeps our local code synchronized with the team’s latest work.
So git pull brings remote changes to the local system.

git pull origin main

16.What is git fetch?

git fetch is a Git command used to download the latest changes from the remote repository without merging them 
into the local code immediately.
It only brings the updated commit history and branch information from GitHub.
After fetching, the developer can review those changes first and then decide when to merge.
So git fetch is considered a safer way to check remote updates.
It updates information but does not directly change the working files.

git fetch origin

17.What is git remote add origin?

git remote add origin ek Git command hai jo local Git repository ko GitHub ki remote repository se connect karti hai.
Jab hum project local machine par banate hain tab Git sirf local folder ko janta hai.
Is command me hum GitHub repository ka URL dete hain aur origin naam se remote connection bana dete hain.
Iske baad hum code ko push aur pull kar sakte hain.
Simple words me, ye local project ko GitHub se jodta hai.

git remote add origin https://github.com/user/my-react-app.git

18.What is git branch?

A Git branch is a separate line of development inside the same repository.
It allows developers to work on new features, bug fixes, or experiments without affecting the main project code.
Each branch has its own independent code changes.
After the work is completed, the branch can be merged back into the main branch.
So branching provides safe parallel development.

git branch payment-feature

19.Why do we create branches in Git?

We create branches in Git to work on new features, bug fixes, or experiments without changing the stable main code directly.
Branches provide an isolated environment where developers can write and test code safely.
If something goes wrong, the main branch remains unaffected.
After the work is successfully completed, the branch can be merged into the main branch.
So branches help in safe and organized parallel development.

20.What is git checkout?

git checkout is a Git command used to switch from one branch to another branch or restore a specific commit/file.
Its most common use is changing the current working branch.
When we checkout a branch, Git loads that branch’s code into the working directory.
This allows developers to move between different development lines easily.
So git checkout is mainly used for branch switching.

git checkout login-feature

21.What is git switch?

git switch is a modern Git command used to switch between branches.
It is a simpler and more focused alternative to git checkout when only changing branches.
Unlike git checkout, it does not handle files or commits, which makes it less confusing.
It improves readability and reduces mistakes in commands.
So git switch is used only for branch switching.

git switch login-feature

22.What is git merge?

git merge is a Git command used to combine the changes of one branch into another branch.
After completing work on a feature branch, developers merge that branch into the main branch.
Git takes the commits from the selected branch and adds them to the current branch.
This helps integrate new features or bug fixes into the main project code.
So git merge is the branch combining command.

git switch main
git merge login-feature

23.What is merge conflict in Git?

A Merge Conflict happens when Git is unable to automatically merge two branches because the same
 part of the same file was changed differently in both branches.
Git gets confused about which version should be kept.
In this situation, the developer must manually review the conflicting code and choose the correct final version.
After resolving it, the merge process can continue normally.
So merge conflict is a code collision during branch merging.

24.How do you resolve merge conflicts?

To resolve a merge conflict, we first open the conflicted file and manually check the conflicting code sections marked by Git.
Then we decide which code should be kept or we combine both changes properly.
After fixing the file, we save it, run git add, and then complete the merge with a commit.
This manual correction tells Git that the conflict has been resolved.
So merge conflicts are resolved by reviewing and fixing code manually.


25.What is .gitignore file?

.gitignore is a special file in Git used to tell Git which files or folders should not be tracked or committed.
Sometimes a project contains unnecessary, secret, or heavy files that should not go into the repository.
We write those file names inside .gitignore, and Git ignores them during git add and git commit.
This keeps the repository clean and secure.
So .gitignore controls ignored files in a Git project.

26.Why is .gitignore important in React projects?

.gitignore is very important in React projects because React applications contain some folders and files
that should not be uploaded to GitHub.
For example, node_modules is a very large dependency folder and .env contains secret environment variables.
If we commit these files, the repository becomes heavy and may expose sensitive information.
By adding them to .gitignore, Git skips tracking them.
So .gitignore keeps React repositories clean, lightweight, and secure.

27.What files are usually added in .gitignore?

Usually we add files and folders in .gitignore that are unnecessary, auto-generated, system-specific, or sensitive.
In React projects, the most common ignored folder is node_modules because it contains installed dependencies and is very large.
We also ignore .env because it stores secret API keys and environment variables.
Build folders like dist or build, log files, and temporary system files are also commonly ignored.
So .gitignore generally contains heavy, private, and generated files.

28.What is README.md file?

README.md is a documentation file placed inside a project repository to explain important details about the project.
It usually contains the project name, description, features, installation steps, usage instructions, and other helpful information.
When someone opens the repository on GitHub, the README file is the first thing they see.
It helps developers and users understand the project quickly.
So README.md acts as the project guide or introduction file.

29.What is git log?

git log is a Git command used to view the complete commit history of the repository.
It shows all previous commits along with commit ID, author name, date, and commit message.
This helps developers track what changes were made over time and by whom.
It is very useful for debugging, reviewing project progress, and understanding version history.
So git log displays the repository’s saved commit timeline.

git log

30.What is git diff?

git diff is a Git command used to see the exact line-by-line differences between the current 
code and the previous saved version.
It shows what content was added, removed, or modified in the files.
This helps developers review their changes before staging or committing them.
It is very useful for checking mistakes and understanding recent edits.
So git diff displays the unsaved code changes in detail.

31.What is git reset?

git reset is a Git command used to undo changes by moving the current branch pointer back to a previous commit
or by removing files from the staging area.
It can unstage added files, discard commits, or restore the repository to an older state depending on how it is used.
This command is mainly used when developers want to correct mistakes before or after commit.
Because it can remove history, it should be used carefully.
So git reset is an undo or rollback command in Git.

git reset

32.What is git revert?

git revert is a Git command used to safely undo a previous commit by creating a new commit that reverses the old changes.
Unlike git reset, it does not delete commit history.
Instead, it keeps the history intact and adds one more commit to cancel the selected commit’s effect.
This makes it safer in shared team repositories.
So git revert is a history-safe undo command.

33.What is the difference between git reset and git revert?

Both git reset and git revert are used to undo changes, but they work differently.
git reset moves the repository back to a previous state and can remove commit history, so it rewrites history.
git revert, on the other hand, keeps the existing history safe and creates a new commit that cancels the selected old commit.
Because of this, git reset is risky for shared repositories, while git revert is safer in team projects.
So reset removes history, while revert preserves history.

35.What is git stash?

git stash is a Git command used to temporarily save uncommitted changes without making a commit.
Sometimes developers are working on unfinished code but need to switch branches or pull new updates.
Instead of committing incomplete work, they can stash those changes safely.
Git removes the changes from the working directory and stores them temporarily.
Later, the stashed changes can be restored when needed.

36.What is git rm?

git rm is a Git command used to remove a file from both the working directory and Git tracking.
When we delete a file normally, Git may still show it as modified or deleted.
Using git rm tells Git officially that this file should be removed and included in the next commit.
So it deletes the file and stages that deletion at the same time.
This is the proper Git way to remove tracked files.

37.What is git mv?

git mv is a Git command used to move or rename a file while keeping Git tracking information intact.
Instead of deleting the old file and creating a new one manually, this command tells Git that the file has simply
been moved or renamed.
It also stages that change automatically for the next commit.
This helps maintain clean file history.
So git mv is used for tracked file rename or move operations.

38.What is git tag?

git tag is a Git command used to create a label or marker on a specific commit in the repository history.
It helps developers identify important project versions such as releases, milestones, or production builds.
Instead of remembering long commit IDs, we can give simple names like v1.0 or release-2026.
Tags make version tracking easier and cleaner.
So git tag is used for version marking in Git.

git tag v1.0

39.What is fork in GitHub?

A Fork in GitHub means creating your own personal copy of someone else’s repository under your GitHub account.
This copied repository remains connected to the original upstream repository, but your changes do not affect
the original project directly.
Forking is mainly used when we want to contribute to an open-source project or experiment with someone else’s code safely.
After making changes in the forked repository, we can request the original owner to merge them through a pull request.
So a fork is an independent GitHub copy of another developer’s repository.

40.What is pull request (PR) in GitHub?

A Pull Request, commonly called PR, is a GitHub feature used to request that your code changes be reviewed 
and merged into another branch or repository.
After completing work in a feature branch or fork, developers create a PR to show the exact changes they made.
Team members can review the code, discuss it, suggest modifications, and then approve the merge.
This makes collaboration safer and more organized.
So a Pull Request is a formal merge request for code review. 

41.What is the difference between pull request and merge?

A Pull Request is a request created on GitHub to ask other developers to review and approve code changes 
before combining them.
It is mainly a discussion and review step.
Merge is the actual process of combining one branch’s code into another branch after approval.
So Pull Request happens before the merge, while merge is the final code integration step.
In simple words, PR asks for permission, merge performs the combination.

42.How do teams collaborate using GitHub?

Teams collaborate on GitHub by storing the project in a shared remote repository where all developers can access the code.
Each developer usually creates separate branches for their features or bug fixes and pushes their work to GitHub.
Then they create Pull Requests so other team members can review the code, suggest changes, and approve it.
After approval, the code is merged into the main branch.
This workflow keeps teamwork organized, safe, and version controlled.

43.How do you upload a React project to GitHub?

To upload a React project to GitHub, first we initialize the project folder as a Git repository using git init.
Then we add all files with git add . and save them using git commit.
After creating a new empty repository on GitHub, we connect the local project with git remote add origin.
Finally, we upload the code online using git push origin main.
This completes the React project upload process.

44.How do you clone an existing project from GitHub?



How do you update your local code with latest remote changes?


How do you create a new branch and push it to GitHub?


What is open source contribution on GitHub?


Have you used GitHub for team collaboration?


How do you track code history in Git?


Explain the complete Git workflow from code writing to pushing on GitHub.



✅ Ye 50 me se top asked almost sab cover ho jate.
Ab tu bol:
inme se top/top important 15 chhant du?
taaki faltu na padhe 😄